#7: Added TLS tutorial (#9)
exasol/exasol-java-tutorial: tls-tutorial/doc/tls_introduction.md

Integrity refers to the assurance that the content of the communication can’t be modified, without first alerting the communication partners. This means a recipient can rely on the fact that what she or he gets from the other communication partner is either what that person sent &mdash; or, if not, it will be flagged as having been manipulated.

Availability highlights that users should have access to a secure connection. This means the connection must work when it is needed, and it must be able to recover from channel outages. It should also be robust against any attackers' attempts to disrupt the communication.

## Alice, Bob and Eve

![Alice, Bob and Eve](images/cl_alice_bob_and_eve.svg)

It is almost impossible to read about security and not come across these three people. They are [personas](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Persona) meant to serve as a graphical example of the challenges involved in information security. Alice and Bob are two regular communication partners. The names were picked because of their initials A and B [see Rivest, Shamir, Adleman, 1978, p. 3](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/359340.359342).

> Eve on the other hand was chosen because it sounds sufficiently similar to eavesdropping and reminds readers that this persona wants get her hands on information that isn’t intended for her. We’re going to use those three established personas in our examples.

Reviewer: Should we add a remark that Eve could as well be male and that we do not want to malign a specific gender? 😸

|   5    | Session layer      | TLS              |
|   4    | Transport layer    | TCP              |
|   3    | Network layer      | IP               |
|   2    | Data link layer    | MAC              |
|   1    | Physical layer     | Network adapter  |

The most obvious one is the physical layer. Here you find the hardware and the physical communication channel like an optical fiber. The data link layer provides a point-to-point connection between two nodes. The network layer allows you to transfer data to other  nodes beyond that direct neighbor. It’s the job of the transport layer to make sure that the data arrives intact on the other side of the communication &mdash; especially if that data is too large to fit into a single transfer unit and needs to be split at the source, correctly reassembled at the sink.

The session layer is responsible for managing the connection state between communication partners. TLS has a session concept &mdash; so a part of TLS lives in this layer. The presentation layer is a translator between what the application expects and what the lower layers provide. In case of TLS,  this means encryption and decryption of application data.

> The image above shows an example for an HTTPS connection. While you can see that the association between protocols and most layers is clear, TLS has parts of both the session and presentation layer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The image above shows an example for an HTTPS connection. While you can see that the association between protocols and most layers is clear, TLS affects parts of both the session and presentation layer.
```

## The Life Cycle of a TLS Connection

> In the following sections, I am going to touch on the most important aspects of a TLS connection. Please note, the details can be very tricky and for many of the steps there are multiple possible variants &mdash; for example, different encryption algorithms can be used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following sections will touch the most important aspects of a TLS connection. Please note, the details can be very tricky and for many of the steps there are multiple possible variants &mdash; for example, different encryption algorithms can be used.
```

### Initial Connection

Before TLS comes into play, we need an IP and a TCP connection between the two communication partners. That means that a TLS connection first starts via an unsecured connection.

As a consequence, the communication partners need to remember all messages they exchange and verify them later.

#### TLS Handshake

Before Alice and Bob can start their actual conversation, they first need to establish the secure communication. This is called the ‘TLS handshake’.

Alice and Bob add random data and a timestamp to the first messages of the communication, in order to prevent so called ‘replay attacks’. In a replay attack, Eve records a communication and tries to take over the next one by replaying the recorded messages. Since the random data and timestamp change each time, Eve’s attack fails.

Now the communication partners establish each other’s authenticity &mdash; or more precisely they should. We’ll get to that in a minute. For now, you just need to be aware that the goal of this step is to make sure that the communication partners are who they claim to be. The driving technology behind this step is called public-key cryptography or asymmetric cryptography.

> Think of a  box with a lock that needs two keys &mdash; one for locking it and one for unlocking it. Bob can give copies of the locking key to anyone he likes, Alice for example. As long as Bob keeps the other key, only he can open the box to get out what other people put in.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Think of a box with a lock that needs two keys &mdash; one for locking it and one for unlocking it. Bob can give copies of the locking key to anyone he likes, Alice for example. As long as Bob keeps the other key, only he can open the box to get out what other people put in.
```

In cryptographic terms we speak of a private key and a public key. As the name suggests, Bob needs to keep the private key secret and can share the other one. Bob could theoretically post the public key on Twitter without compromising security. But there are better ways to do this, and we will discuss them later.

> Asymmetric cryptography works nicely for authenticating a communication partner. Conceptually, Alice creates a piece of data that is sufficiently hard to guess (for example a large random number) and asks Bob to encrypt it with that Bob’s private key. Bob then sends the result back. Alice uses Bob’s public key to decrypt the data and compare it with the original. If the data matches, Alice knows she is talking to Bob. The details are, of course, more complicated in reality. But as a first approximation this example is good enough.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Asymmetric cryptography works nicely for authenticating a communication partner. Conceptually, Alice creates a piece of data that is sufficiently hard to guess (for example a large random number) and asks Bob to encrypt it with Bob’s private key. Bob then sends the result back. Alice uses Bob’s public key to decrypt the data and compare the result with the original data. If the data matches, Alice knows she is talking to Bob. The details are, of course, more complicated in reality. But as a first approximation this example is good enough.
```

### Key Exchange

One aspect that makes all mechanisms like TLS more complex is the fact that asymmetric cryptography is expensive. This means it takes up a large amount of computing resources, especially CPU and network bandwidth. On the other hand, we have no resources to waste, especially when it comes to long-distance communication. So the TLS inventors came up with the concept of switching to symmetric cryptography.

As said, asymmetric cryptography is too expensive to transfer mass data. What’s a more efficient way then? Negotiating a new key after the initial handshake and switching the encryption to symmetric (e.g. [AES](http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc3268.html)) from that point on. So, symmetric encryption is by orders of magnitude, cheaper.

> The symmetric key is what we call the 'session key' as it is created each time you start a new session. In fact, it can even be exchanged during a running session if it reaches a predefined expiry.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The symmetric key is what we call the 'session key' as it is created each time you start a new session. In fact, it can even be replaced during a running session if it reaches a predefined expiry.
```
